doc/modules/language-guide/pages/compiler-ref.adoc, before:

= Compiler reference
:proglang: Motoko
:sdk-short-name: DFINITY Canister SDK
:company-id: DFINITY
:!page-repl:

The {proglang} compiler (`+moc+`) is the primary tool for compiling {proglang} programs into executable WebAssembly (Wasm) modules. 
The compiler runs in the background when you build projects using the {sdk-short-name}. 
If you invoke the compiler directly on the command-line, you can press CTRL-C to exit.

This section provides compiler command-line reference information.

== moc

Use the {proglang} compiler (`+moc+`) to compile {proglang} programs into executable WebAssembly (Wasm) modules.

=== Basic usage

[source,bash]
----
moc [option] [file ...]
----

=== Options

You can use the following options with the `+moc+` command.

[width="100%",cols="<45%,<55%",options="header",]
|===
|Option |Description
|`+--actor-idl <idl-path>+` |Specifies a path to actor IDL (Candid) files.

|`+--actor-alias <alias> <principal>+` |Specifies an actor import alias.

|`+--args <file>+` |Read additional newline separated command line arguments from <file>

|`+--args0 <file>+` |Read additional NUL separated command line arguments from <file>

|`+-c+` |Compile to WebAssembly.

|`+--check+` |Performs type checking only.

|`+--compacting-gc+` |Link with compacting GC instead of copying GC.

|`+--debug+` |Respects debug expressions in the source (the default).

//|`+-dp+` |Dumps parse.

//|`+-dt+` |Dumps type-checked AST.

//|`+-dl+` |Dumps intermediate representation

|`+--error-detail <n>+` |Set level of error message detail for syntax errors, n in [0..3] (default 2).

|`+-help+`,`+--help+` |Displays usage information.

|`+--hide-warnings+` |Hides compiler warnings.

|`+-Werror+` |Treat warnings as errors.

|`+--idl+` |Generates the interface description language specification.

|`+-i+` |Runs the compiler in an interactive read–eval–print loop (REPL) shell so you can evaluate program execution (implies -r).

//|`+-iR+` |Interprets the lowered code.

|`+--map+` |Outputs a JavaScript source map.

//|`+-no-await+` |Disables await-lowering (with -iR).

//|`+-no-async+` |Disables async-lowering (with -iR).

//|`+-no-check-ir+` |Skips intermediate code checking.

//|`+-no-link+` |Disables statically-linked runtime.

|`+-no-system-api+` |Disables system API imports.

|`+-o <file>+` |Specifies the output file.

|`+-p <n>+` |Sets the print depth.

|`+--package <package-name> <package-path>+` |Specifies a package-name package-path pair, separated by a space.

|`+--print-deps+` |Prints the dependencies for a given source file.

//|`+--profile+` |Activates profiling counters in interpreters.

//|`+--profile-field <field>+` |Includes the given field from the program result in the profile file.

//|`+--profile-file+` |Sets profiling output file.

//|`+--profile-line-prefix <prefix>+` |Adds the specified prefix string to each profile line.

|`+-r+` |Interprets programs.

|`+--release+` |Ignores debug expressions in the source.

//|`+--sanity-checks+` |Enable sanity checking in the runtime system and generated code (for compiler development only).

|`+-t+` |Activates tracing in interpreter.

|`+-v+` |Generates verbose output.

|`+--version+` |Displays version information.

|`+-wasi-system-api+` |Uses the WASI system API (wasmtime).
|===

Commit message:

[feat] stable signatures: frontend, metadata, command-line args and tests (#2887)
Implements all support for stable signatures (plus candid:service and candid:arg custom sections)

Rolls up PRs

- #2884 (final integration plus fixes)
- #2867
- #2838 
- #2827 

You can either review this massive PR in one go or the others in reverse order (note the last one #2884 includes some fixes to the compatibility relation, which was buggy in #2827 and final refactorings).

This work is all based on the original design here:

https://github.com/dfinity/motoko/blob/master/design/Stable.md#stable-signatures

Also implements #2837

doc/modules/language-guide/pages/compiler-ref.adoc, after:

= Compiler reference
:proglang: Motoko
:sdk-short-name: DFINITY Canister SDK
:company-id: DFINITY
:!page-repl:

The {proglang} compiler (`+moc+`) is the primary tool for compiling {proglang} programs into executable WebAssembly (Wasm) modules. 
The compiler runs in the background when you build projects using the {sdk-short-name}. 
If you invoke the compiler directly on the command-line, you can press CTRL-C to exit.

This section provides compiler command-line reference information.

== moc

Use the {proglang} compiler (`+moc+`) to compile {proglang} programs into executable WebAssembly (Wasm) modules.

=== Basic usage

[source,bash]
----
moc [option] [file ...]
----

=== Options

You can use the following options with the `+moc+` command.

[width="100%",cols="<45%,<55%",options="header",]
|===
|Option |Description
|`+--actor-idl <idl-path>+` |Specifies a path to actor IDL (Candid) files.

|`+--actor-alias <alias> <principal>+` |Specifies an actor import alias.

|`+--args <file>+` |Read additional newline separated command line arguments from <file>

|`+--args0 <file>+` |Read additional NUL separated command line arguments from <file>

|`+-c+` |Compile to WebAssembly.

|`+--check+` |Performs type checking only.

|`+--compacting-gc+` | Use compacting GC (default)

|`+--copying-gc+` | Use copying GC

|`+--debug+` |Respects debug expressions in the source (the default).

//|`+-dp+` |Dumps parse.

//|`+-dt+` |Dumps type-checked AST.

//|`+-dl+` |Dumps intermediate representation

|`+--error-detail <n>+` |Set level of error message detail for syntax errors, n in [0..3] (default 2).

|`+-help+`,`+--help+` |Displays usage information.

|`+--hide-warnings+` |Hides compiler warnings.

|`+-Werror+` |Treat warnings as errors.

|`+--idl+` | Compile binary and emit Candid IDL specification to `.did` file.

|`+-i+` |Runs the compiler in an interactive read–eval–print loop (REPL) shell so you can evaluate program execution (implies -r).

//|`+-iR+` |Interprets the lowered code.

|`+--map+` |Outputs a JavaScript source map.

//|`+-no-await+` |Disables await-lowering (with -iR).

//|`+-no-async+` |Disables async-lowering (with -iR).

//|`+-no-check-ir+` |Skips intermediate code checking.

//|`+-no-link+` |Disables statically-linked runtime.

|`+-no-system-api+` |Disables system API imports.

|`+-o <file>+` |Specifies the output file.

|`+-p <n>+` |Sets the print depth.

|`+--package <package-name> <package-path>+` |Specifies a package-name package-path pair, separated by a space.

|`+--public-metadata <name>+` |Emit icp custom section <name> (candid:args or candid:service or motoko:stable-types) as `public` (default is `private`)

|`+--print-deps+` |Prints the dependencies for a given source file.

//|`+--profile+` |Activates profiling counters in interpreters.

//|`+--profile-field <field>+` |Includes the given field from the program result in the profile file.

//|`+--profile-file+` |Sets profiling output file.

//|`+--profile-line-prefix <prefix>+` |Adds the specified prefix string to each profile line.

|`+-r+` |Interprets programs.

|`+--release+` |Ignores debug expressions in the source.

//|`+--sanity-checks+` |Enable sanity checking in the runtime system and generated code (for compiler development only).

| `--stable-types` |Compile binary and emit signature of stable types to `.most` file.

| `--stable-compatible <pre> <post>` |Test upgrade compatibility between stable-type signatures <pre> and <post>

|`+-t+` |Activates tracing in interpreter.

|`+-v+` |Generates verbose output.

|`+--version+` |Displays version information.

|`+-wasi-system-api+` |Uses the WASI system API (wasmtime).
|===
