doc/modules/language-guide/pages/control-flow.adoc, before:

= Imperative control flow

There are two key categories of control flow:

- _declarative_, when the structure of some value  guides control and the selection of the next expression to evaluate, like in `if` and `switch` expressions;
- _imperative_  where control changes abruptly according to a programmer's command, abondoning regular control flow; examples are `break` and `continue`, but also `return` and `throw`.

Imperative control flow often goes hand-in-hand with state changes and other flavors of side-effects, such as error handling and input/output.

[[early-return]]
== Early `return` from `func`

Normally, the result of a function is the value of its body. Sometimes, during evaluation of the body, the result is available before the end of evaluation. In such situations the `return ⟨exp⟩` construct can be used to abandon the rest of the computation and immediately exit the function with a result.
Similarly, where permitted, `throw` may be used to abandon a computation with an error.

When a function has unit result type, the shorthand `return` may be used instead of the equivalent `return ()`.

[[loops-labels]]
== Loops and labels

{proglang} provides several kinds of repetition constructs, including:

- `for` expressions for iterating over members of structured data.
- `loop` expressions for programmatic repetition (optionally with termination condition).
- `while` loops for programmatic repetition with entry condition.

Any of these can be prefixed with a `label ⟨name⟩` qualifier to give the loop a symbolic name. Named loops are useful for imperatively changing  control flow to continue from the entry or exit of the named loop.

- re-entering the loop with `continue ⟨name⟩`, or
- exiting the loop altogether with `break ⟨name⟩`.

In the following example, the `for` expression loops over characters of some text and abandons iteration as soon as an exclamation sign is encountered.

[source, motoko]
....
import Debug "mo:base/Debug";
label letters for (c in "ran!!dom".chars()) {
  Debug.print(debug_show(c));
  if (c == '!') { break letters };
  // ...
}
....

=== Labeled expressions

There are two other facets to `label`{zwsp}s that are less mainstream, but come in handy in certain situations:

- `label`{zwsp}s can be typed
- _any_ expression (not just loops) can be named by prefixing it with a label; `break` allows one to short-circuit the expression's evaluation by providing an immediate value for its result. (This is similar to exiting a function early using `return`, but without the overhead of declaring and calling a function.)

The syntax for type-annotated labels is `label ⟨name⟩ : ⟨type⟩ ⟨expr⟩`, signifying that any expression can be exited using a `break ⟨name⟩ ⟨alt-expr⟩` construct that returns the value of `<alt-expr>` as the value of `⟨expr⟩`, short-circuiting evaluation of `<expr>`.

Judicious use of these constructs allows the programmer to focus on the primary program logic and handle exceptional case via `break`

[source, motoko]
....
import Text "mo:base/Text";
import Iter "mo:base/Iter";

type Host = Text;
let formInput = "us@dfn";

let address = label exit : ?(Text, Host) {
  let splitted = Text.split(formInput, #char '@');
  let array = Iter.toArray<Text>(splitted);
  if (array.size() != 2) { break exit(null) };
  let account = array[0];
  let host = array[1];
  // if (not (parseHost(host))) { break exit(null) };
  ?(account, host)
}
....

Naturally, labeled common expressions don't allow `continue`. In terms of typing, both `⟨expr⟩` and `⟨alt-expr⟩`{zwsp}'s types must conform with the label's declared `⟨type⟩`. If a label is only given a `⟨name⟩`, then its `⟨type⟩` defaults to unit (`()`). Similarly a `break` without an `⟨alt-expr⟩` is shorthand for the value unit (`()`).

[[option-blocks]]
== Option blocks and null breaks

Like many other high-level languages, {proglang} lets you opt in to `null` values, tracking possible occurences of `null` values using option types of the form `?T`.
This is to both to encourage you to avoid using `null` values when possible, and to consider the possiblity of `null` values when necessary.

The latter could be cumbersome, if the only way to test a value for `null` were with a verbose `switch` expression, but
{proglang} simplifies the handling of option types with some dedicated syntax: _option blocks_ and _null breaks_.

The option block, `do ? <block>`, produces a value of type `?T`, when block `<block>` has type `T` and, importantly, introduces the possibility of a break from `<block>`.
Within a `do ? <block>`, the null break `<exp> !`, tests whether the result of the expression, '<exp>', of unrelated option type, `?U`, is `null`.
If the result `<exp>` is `null`, control immediately exits the `do ? <block>` with value `null`.
Otherwise, the result of `<exp>` must be an option value `?v`, and evaluation of `<exp> !` proceeds with its contents, `v` (of type `U`).

As realistic example, we give the definition of a simple function `eval`uating numeric `Exp`ressions built from natural numbers, division and a zero test, encoded as a variant type:

////
TODO: make interactive
////

[source,motoko]
----
include::../examples/option-block.mo[]
----

To guard against division by `0` without trapping, the `eval` function returns an option result, using `null` to indicate failure.

Each recursive call is checked for `null` using `!`, immediately exiting the outer `do ? block`, and thus the function itself, with `null`, when a result is `null`.

(As an exercise that illustrates the concision of option blocks, you might want to try rewriting `eval` using a labeled expression and explicit switches for each null break.)

[[repetition-loop]]
== Repetition with `loop`

The simplest way to indefinitely repeat a sequence of imperative expressions is by using a `loop` construct

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
loop { ⟨expr1⟩; ⟨expr2⟩; ... }
....

The loop can only be abandoned with a `return` or `break` construct.

A re-entry condition can be affixed to allow a conditional repetition of the loop with `loop ⟨body⟩ while ⟨cond⟩`.

The body of such a loop is always executed at least once.

[[while-loops]]
== `while` loops with precondition

Sometimes an entry condition is needed to guard the first execution of a loop. For this kind of repetition the `while ⟨cond⟩ ⟨body⟩`-flavor is available

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
while (earned < need) { earned += earn() };
....

Unlike a `loop`, the body of a `while` loop may never be executed.

[[for-loops]]
== `for` loops for iteration

An iteration over elements of some homogeneous collection can be performed using a `for` loop. The values are drawn from an iterator and bound to the loop pattern in turn.

[source, motoko]
....
let carsInStock = [
  ("Buick", 2020, 23.000),
  ("Toyota", 2019, 17.500),
  ("Audi", 2020, 34.900)
];
var inventory : { var value : Float } = { var value = 0.0 };
for ((model, year, price) in carsInStock.vals()) {
  inventory.value += price;
};
inventory
....

[[intro-range]]
== Using `range` with a `for` loop

The `range` function produces an iterator (of type `Iter<Nat>`) with the given lower and upper bound, inclusive.

The following loop example prints the numbers `0` through `10` over its _eleven_ iterations:

[source, motoko]
....
import Iter "mo:base/Iter";
import Debug "mo:base/Debug";
var i = 0;
for (j in Iter.range(0, 10)) {
  Debug.print(debug_show(j));
  assert(j == i);
  i += 1;
};
assert(i == 11);
....


More generally, the function `range` is a `class` that constructs iterators over sequences of natural numbers.  Each such iterator has type `Iter<Nat>`.

As a constructor function, `range` has a function type:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
(lower:Nat, upper:Nat) -> Iter<Nat>
....

Where `Iter<Nat>` is an iterator object type with a `next` method that produces optional elements, each of type `?Nat`:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
type Iter<A> = {next : () -> ?A};
....

For each invocation, `next` returns an optional element (of type
`?Nat`).

The value `null` indicates that the iteration sequence has terminated.

Until reaching `null`, each non-`null` value, of the form ``?``__n__ for some number _n_, contains the next successive element in the iteration sequence.

[[intro-revrange]]
== Using `revrange`

Like `range`, the function `revrange` is a `class` that constructs iterators (each of type `Iter<Nat>`).
As a constructor function, it has a function type:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
(upper:Nat, lower:Nat) -> Iter<Nat>
....

Unlike `range`, the `revrange` function _descends_ in its iteration sequence, from an initial _upper_ bound to a final _lower_ bound.

[[other-iterators]]
== Using iterators of specific data structures

Many built-in data structures come with pre-defined iterators. Below table lists them

.Iterators for data structures
|===
|Type |Name |Iterator |Elements |Element type

|`[T]`
|array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`vals`
|the array's members
|`T`

|`[T]`
|array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`keys`
|the array's valid indices
|`Nat`

|`[var T]`
|mutable array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`vals`
|the array's members
|`T`

|`[var T]`
|mutable array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`keys`
|the array's valid indices
|`Nat`

|`Text`
|text
|`chars`
|the text's characters
|`Char`

|`Blob`
|blob
|`vals`
|the blob's bytes
|`Nat8`
|===

User-defined data structures can define their own iterators. As long they conform with the `Iter<A>` type for some element type `A`, these behave like the built-in ones and can be consumed with ordinary `for`-loops.

Commit message:

fix documentation for `range` and `revRange`
fixes #2920

doc/modules/language-guide/pages/control-flow.adoc, after:

= Imperative control flow

There are two key categories of control flow:

- _declarative_, when the structure of some value  guides control and the selection of the next expression to evaluate, like in `if` and `switch` expressions;
- _imperative_  where control changes abruptly according to a programmer's command, abondoning regular control flow; examples are `break` and `continue`, but also `return` and `throw`.

Imperative control flow often goes hand-in-hand with state changes and other flavors of side-effects, such as error handling and input/output.

[[early-return]]
== Early `return` from `func`

Normally, the result of a function is the value of its body. Sometimes, during evaluation of the body, the result is available before the end of evaluation. In such situations the `return ⟨exp⟩` construct can be used to abandon the rest of the computation and immediately exit the function with a result.
Similarly, where permitted, `throw` may be used to abandon a computation with an error.

When a function has unit result type, the shorthand `return` may be used instead of the equivalent `return ()`.

[[loops-labels]]
== Loops and labels

{proglang} provides several kinds of repetition constructs, including:

- `for` expressions for iterating over members of structured data.
- `loop` expressions for programmatic repetition (optionally with termination condition).
- `while` loops for programmatic repetition with entry condition.

Any of these can be prefixed with a `label ⟨name⟩` qualifier to give the loop a symbolic name. Named loops are useful for imperatively changing  control flow to continue from the entry or exit of the named loop.

- re-entering the loop with `continue ⟨name⟩`, or
- exiting the loop altogether with `break ⟨name⟩`.

In the following example, the `for` expression loops over characters of some text and abandons iteration as soon as an exclamation sign is encountered.

[source, motoko]
....
import Debug "mo:base/Debug";
label letters for (c in "ran!!dom".chars()) {
  Debug.print(debug_show(c));
  if (c == '!') { break letters };
  // ...
}
....

=== Labeled expressions

There are two other facets to `label`{zwsp}s that are less mainstream, but come in handy in certain situations:

- `label`{zwsp}s can be typed
- _any_ expression (not just loops) can be named by prefixing it with a label; `break` allows one to short-circuit the expression's evaluation by providing an immediate value for its result. (This is similar to exiting a function early using `return`, but without the overhead of declaring and calling a function.)

The syntax for type-annotated labels is `label ⟨name⟩ : ⟨type⟩ ⟨expr⟩`, signifying that any expression can be exited using a `break ⟨name⟩ ⟨alt-expr⟩` construct that returns the value of `<alt-expr>` as the value of `⟨expr⟩`, short-circuiting evaluation of `<expr>`.

Judicious use of these constructs allows the programmer to focus on the primary program logic and handle exceptional case via `break`

[source, motoko]
....
import Text "mo:base/Text";
import Iter "mo:base/Iter";

type Host = Text;
let formInput = "us@dfn";

let address = label exit : ?(Text, Host) {
  let splitted = Text.split(formInput, #char '@');
  let array = Iter.toArray<Text>(splitted);
  if (array.size() != 2) { break exit(null) };
  let account = array[0];
  let host = array[1];
  // if (not (parseHost(host))) { break exit(null) };
  ?(account, host)
}
....

Naturally, labeled common expressions don't allow `continue`. In terms of typing, both `⟨expr⟩` and `⟨alt-expr⟩`{zwsp}'s types must conform with the label's declared `⟨type⟩`. If a label is only given a `⟨name⟩`, then its `⟨type⟩` defaults to unit (`()`). Similarly a `break` without an `⟨alt-expr⟩` is shorthand for the value unit (`()`).

[[option-blocks]]
== Option blocks and null breaks

Like many other high-level languages, {proglang} lets you opt in to `null` values, tracking possible occurences of `null` values using option types of the form `?T`.
This is to both to encourage you to avoid using `null` values when possible, and to consider the possiblity of `null` values when necessary.

The latter could be cumbersome, if the only way to test a value for `null` were with a verbose `switch` expression, but
{proglang} simplifies the handling of option types with some dedicated syntax: _option blocks_ and _null breaks_.

The option block, `do ? <block>`, produces a value of type `?T`, when block `<block>` has type `T` and, importantly, introduces the possibility of a break from `<block>`.
Within a `do ? <block>`, the null break `<exp> !`, tests whether the result of the expression, '<exp>', of unrelated option type, `?U`, is `null`.
If the result `<exp>` is `null`, control immediately exits the `do ? <block>` with value `null`.
Otherwise, the result of `<exp>` must be an option value `?v`, and evaluation of `<exp> !` proceeds with its contents, `v` (of type `U`).

As realistic example, we give the definition of a simple function `eval`uating numeric `Exp`ressions built from natural numbers, division and a zero test, encoded as a variant type:

////
TODO: make interactive
////

[source,motoko]
----
include::../examples/option-block.mo[]
----

To guard against division by `0` without trapping, the `eval` function returns an option result, using `null` to indicate failure.

Each recursive call is checked for `null` using `!`, immediately exiting the outer `do ? block`, and thus the function itself, with `null`, when a result is `null`.

(As an exercise that illustrates the concision of option blocks, you might want to try rewriting `eval` using a labeled expression and explicit switches for each null break.)

[[repetition-loop]]
== Repetition with `loop`

The simplest way to indefinitely repeat a sequence of imperative expressions is by using a `loop` construct

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
loop { ⟨expr1⟩; ⟨expr2⟩; ... }
....

The loop can only be abandoned with a `return` or `break` construct.

A re-entry condition can be affixed to allow a conditional repetition of the loop with `loop ⟨body⟩ while ⟨cond⟩`.

The body of such a loop is always executed at least once.

[[while-loops]]
== `while` loops with precondition

Sometimes an entry condition is needed to guard the first execution of a loop. For this kind of repetition the `while ⟨cond⟩ ⟨body⟩`-flavor is available

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
while (earned < need) { earned += earn() };
....

Unlike a `loop`, the body of a `while` loop may never be executed.

[[for-loops]]
== `for` loops for iteration

An iteration over elements of some homogeneous collection can be performed using a `for` loop. The values are drawn from an iterator and bound to the loop pattern in turn.

[source, motoko]
....
let carsInStock = [
  ("Buick", 2020, 23.000),
  ("Toyota", 2019, 17.500),
  ("Audi", 2020, 34.900)
];
var inventory : { var value : Float } = { var value = 0.0 };
for ((model, year, price) in carsInStock.vals()) {
  inventory.value += price;
};
inventory
....

[[intro-range]]
== Using `range` with a `for` loop

The `range` function produces an iterator (of type `Iter<Nat>`) with the given lower and upper bound, inclusive.

The following loop example prints the numbers `0` through `10` over its _eleven_ iterations:

[source, motoko]
....
import Iter "mo:base/Iter";
import Debug "mo:base/Debug";
var i = 0;
for (j in Iter.range(0, 10)) {
  Debug.print(debug_show(j));
  assert(j == i);
  i += 1;
};
assert(i == 11);
....


More generally, the function `range` is a `class` that constructs iterators over sequences of natural numbers.  Each such iterator has type `Iter<Nat>`.

As a constructor function, `range` has a function type:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
(lower : Nat, upper : Int) -> Iter<Nat>
....

Where `Iter<Nat>` is an iterator object type with a `next` method that produces optional elements, each of type `?Nat`:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
type Iter<A> = {next : () -> ?A};
....

For each invocation, `next` returns an optional element (of type
`?Nat`).

The value `null` indicates that the iteration sequence has terminated.

Until reaching `null`, each non-`null` value, of the form ``?``__n__ for some number _n_, contains the next successive element in the iteration sequence.

[[intro-revrange]]
== Using `revRange`

Like `range`, the function `revRange` is a `class` that constructs iterators (each of type `Iter<Int>`).
As a constructor function, it has a function type:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
(upper : Int, lower : Int) -> Iter<Int>
....

Unlike `range`, the `revRange` function _descends_ in its iteration sequence, from an initial _upper_ bound to a final _lower_ bound.

[[other-iterators]]
== Using iterators of specific data structures

Many built-in data structures come with pre-defined iterators. Below table lists them

.Iterators for data structures
|===
|Type |Name |Iterator |Elements |Element type

|`[T]`
|array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`vals`
|the array's members
|`T`

|`[T]`
|array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`keys`
|the array's valid indices
|`Nat`

|`[var T]`
|mutable array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`vals`
|the array's members
|`T`

|`[var T]`
|mutable array of `T`{zwsp}s
|`keys`
|the array's valid indices
|`Nat`

|`Text`
|text
|`chars`
|the text's characters
|`Char`

|`Blob`
|blob
|`vals`
|the blob's bytes
|`Nat8`
|===

User-defined data structures can define their own iterators. As long they conform with the `Iter<A>` type for some element type `A`, these behave like the built-in ones and can be consumed with ordinary `for`-loops.
