doc/modules/language-guide/pages/mutable-state.adoc, before:

= Mutable states
:proglang: Motoko
:company-id: DFINITY

Each actor in {proglang} may use, but may _never directly share_,
internal mutable state.

Later, we discuss link:sharing{outfilesuffix}[sharing among actors], where
actors send and receive _immutable_ data, and also handles to each
others external entry points, which serve as _shareable functions_.
Unlike those cases of shareable data, a key {proglang} design
invariant is that _**mutable data** is kept internal (private) to the
actor that allocates it, and **is never shared remotely**_.

In this chapter, we continue using minimal
examples to show how to introduce (private) actor state, and use
mutation operations to change it over time.

In link:local-objects-classes{outfilesuffix}[local objects and classes], we introduce the
syntax for local objects, and a minimal `counter` actor with a single
mutable variable.  In the link:actors-async{outfilesuffix}[following chapter], we
show an actor with the same behavior, exposing the counter variable
indirectly behind an associated service interface for using it
remotely.

== Immutable versus mutable variables

The `var` syntax declares mutable variables in a declaration
block:

[source#init, motoko]
....
let text  : Text = "abc";
let num  : Nat = 30;

var pair : (Text, Nat) = (text, num);
var text2 : Text = text;
....

The declaration list above declares four variables.
The first two variables (`text` and `num`) are lexically-scoped, _immutable variables_.
The final two variables (`pair` and `text2`) are lexically-scoped, *_mutable_* variables.

[[intro-assignment]]
== Assignment to mutable memory

Mutable variables permit assignment, and immutable variables do not.

If we try to assign new values to either `text` or `num` above, we
will get static type errors; these variables are immutable.

However, we may freely update the value of mutable variables `pair`
and `text2` using the syntax for assignment, written as `:=`, as follows:

[source.include_init, motoko]
....
text2 := text2 # "xyz";
pair := (text2, pair.1);
pair
....

Above, we update each variable based on applying a simple "`update
rule`" to their current values (for example, we _update_ `text2` by
appending string constant `"xyz"` to its suffix).  Likewise, an actor
processes some calls by performing _updates_ on its internal (private)
mutable variables, using the same assignment syntax as above.

=== Special assignment operations

The assignment operation `:=` is general, and works for all types.

{proglang} also includes special assignment operations that combine
assignment with a binary operation.  The assigned value uses the
binary operation on a given operand and the
current contents of the assigned variable.

For example, numbers permit a combination of assignment and addition:

[source, motoko]
....
var num2 = 2;
num2 += 40;
num2
....

After the second line, the variable `num2` holds `42`, as one would expect.

{proglang} includes other combinations as well.  For example, we can rewrite the line above that updates `text2` more concisely as:

[source.include_init, motoko]
....
text2 #= "xyz";
text2
....

As with `+=`, this combined form avoids repeating the assigned
variable's name on the right hand side of the (special) assignment
operator `#=`.

The link:language-manual{outfilesuffix}#syntax-ops-assignment[full list of assignment operations]
lists numerical, logical, and textual operations over appropriate
types (number, boolean and text values, respectively).

== Reading from mutable memory

When we updated each variable, we also first _read_ from the mutable
contents, with no special syntax.

This illustrates a subtle point: Each use of a mutable variable _looks
like_ the use of an immutable variable, but does not _act like_ one.
In fact, its meaning is more complex.  As in many languages
(JavaScript, Java, C#, etc.), but not all, the syntax of each use
hides the _memory effect_ that accesses the memory cell identified by
that variable, and gets its current value.  Other languages from
functional traditions (SML, OCaml, Haskell, etc), generally expose
these effects syntactically.

Below, we explore this point in detail.

== Understanding `var`- versus `let`-bound variables

Consider the following two variable declarations, which look similar:

[source, motoko]
....
let x : Nat = 0
....

and:

[source, motoko]
....
var x : Nat = 0
....

The only difference in their syntax is the use of keyword `let` versus
`var` to define the variable `x`, which in each case the program
initializes to `0`.

However, these programs carry different meanings, and in the context of larger programs, the difference in meanings will impact the meaning of each occurrence of `x`.

For the first program, which uses `let`, each such occurrence _means_ `0`.  Replacing each occurrence with `0` will not change the meaning of the program.

For the second program, which uses `var`, each occurrence _means_: "`read and produce the current value of the mutable memory cell named `x`.`"
In this case, each occurrence's value is determined by dynamic state: the contents of the mutable memory cell named `x`.

As one can see from the definitions above, there is a fundamental contrast between the meanings of `let`-bound and `var`-bound variables.

In large programs, both kinds of variables can be useful, and neither kind serves as a good replacement for the other.

However, `let`-bound variables _are_ more fundamental.

To see why, consider encoding a `var`-bound variable using a one-element, mutable array, itself bound using a `let`-bound variable.

For instance, instead of declaring `x` as a mutable variable initially holding `0`, we could instead use `y`, an immutable variable that denotes a mutable array with one entry, holding `0`:

[source, motoko]
....
var x : Nat       = 0 ;
let y : [var Nat] = [var 0] ;
....

We explain mutable arrays in more detail <<mutable-arrays, below>>.

Unfortunately, the read and write syntax required for this encoding
reuses that of mutable arrays, which is not as readable as that of
`var`-bound variables.  As such, the reads and writes of variable `x`
will be easier to read than those of variable `y`.

For this practical reason, and others, `var`-bound variables are a
core aspect of the language design.

[[immutable-arrays]]
== Immutable arrays

Before discussing <<mutable-arrays, mutable arrays>>, we introduce immutable arrays, which share the same projection syntax, but do not permit mutable updates (assignments) after allocation.

=== Allocate an immutable array of constants

[source#array, motoko]
....
let a : [Nat] = [1, 2, 3] ;
....

The array `a` above holds three natural numbers, and has type `[Nat]`.
In general, the type of an immutable array is `[_]`, using square
brackets around the type of the array's elements, which must share a
single common type, in this case `Nat`.

=== Project from (read from) an array index

We can project from (_read from_) an array using the usual bracket
syntax (`[` and `]`) around the index we want to access:

[source.include_array, motoko]
....
let x : Nat = a[2] + a[0] ;
....

Every array access in {proglang} is safe.  Accesses that are out of
bounds will not access memory unsafely, but instead will cause the program to trap, as with an link:basic-concepts{outfilesuffix}#overview-traps[assertion failure].

== The Array module

The {proglang} standard library provides basic operations for immutable and mutable arrays. It can be imported as follows,

[source#import, motoko]
....
import Array "mo:base/Array";
....

In this section, we discuss some of the most frequently used array operations.
For more information about using arrays, see the link:stdlib/array{outfilesuffix}[Array] library descriptions.

=== Allocate an immutable array with varying content

Above, we showed a limited way of creating immutable arrays.

In general, each new array allocated by a program will contain
a varying number of varying elements.  Without mutation, we need a way
to specify this family of elements "all at once", in the argument to
allocation.

To accommodate this need, the {proglang} language provides _the
higher-order_ array-allocation function `Array.tabulate`, which
allocates a new array by consulting a user-provided "generation
function" `gen` for each element.

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
func tabulate<T>(size : Nat,  gen : Nat -> T) : [T]
....

Function `gen` specifies the array _as a function value_ of arrow
type `Nat -> T`, where `T` is the final array element type.

The function `gen` actually _functions_ as the array during
its initialization: It receives the index of the array element, and it produces the element (of type `T`) that should reside at that index in the array.
The allocated output array populates itself based on this specification.

For instance, we can first allocate `array1` consisting of some initial constants, and then functionally-update _some_ of the indices by "changing" them (in a pure, functional way), to produce `array2`, a second array that does not destroy the first.

[source.include_import, motoko]
....
let array1 : [Nat] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8] ;

let array2 : [Nat] = Array.tabulate<Nat>(7, func(i:Nat) : Nat {
    if ( i == 2 or i == 5 ) { array1[i] * i } // change 3rd and 6th entries
    else { array1[i] } // no change to other entries
  }) ;
....

Even though we "changed" `array1` into `array2` in a functional sense, notice that both arrays and both variables are immutable.

Next, we consider _mutable_ arrays, which are fundamentally distinct.

== Mutable arrays
[[mutable-arrays]]

Above, we introduced _immutable_ arrays, which share the same projection syntax as mutable arrays, but do not permit mutable updates (assignments) after allocation.  Unlike immutable arrays, each mutable array in {proglang} introduces (private) mutable actor state.

Because {proglang}'s type system enforces that remote actors do not share their mutable state, the {proglang} type system introduces a firm distinction between mutable and immutable arrays that impacts typing, subtyping and the language abstractions for asynchronous communication.

Locally, the mutable arrays can not be used in places that expect immutable ones, since {proglang}'s definition of link:language-manual{outfilesuffix}#subtyping[subtyping] for arrays (correctly) distinguishes those cases for the purposes of type soundness.
Additionally, in terms of
actor communication, immutable arrays are safe to send and share, while mutable arrays can not be shared or otherwise sent in messages.
Unlike immutable arrays, mutable arrays have _non-shareable types_.

=== Allocate a mutable array of constants

To indicate allocation of _mutable_ arrays (in contrast to the forms above, for immutable ones), the mutable array syntax `[var _]` uses the `var` keyword, in both the expression and type forms:

[source, motoko]
....
let a : [var Nat] = [var 1, 2, 3] ;
....

As above, the array `a` above holds three natural numbers, but has type `[var Nat]`.

=== Allocate a mutable array with dynamic size

To allocate mutable arrays of non-constant size, use the `Array_init` primitive, and supply an initial value:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
func init<T>(size : Nat,  x : T) : [var T]
....

For example:

[source.include_import, motoko]
....
var size : Nat = 42 ;
let x : [var Nat] = Array.init<Nat>(size, 3);
....

The variable `size` need not be constant here; the array will have `size` number of entries, each holding the initial value `3`.

=== Mutable updates

Mutable arrays, each with type form `[var _]`, permit mutable updates via assignment to an individual element, in this case element index `2` gets updated from holding `3` to instead hold value `42`:

[source, motoko]
....
let a : [var Nat] = [var 1, 2, 3];
a[2] := 42;
a
....

[[intro-array-subtyping]]
=== Subtyping does not permit _mutable_ to be used as _immutable_

Subtyping in {proglang} does not permit us to use a mutable array of type `[var Nat]` in places that expect an immutable one of type `[Nat]`.

There are two reasons for this.
First, as with all mutable state, mutable arrays require different rules for sound subtyping.
In particular, mutable arrays have a less flexible subtyping definition, necessarily.
Second, {proglang} forbids uses of mutable arrays across link:actors-async{outfilesuffix}[asynchronous communication], where mutable state is never shared.

Commit message:

doc: markdown docs (#3172)
# Convert adoc to md and incorporate base library docs

In this PR, the markdown docs are generated from the adoc sources into `doc/md`, `docs/md/examples` and `docs/md/base`
using Makefile targets `make base` and `make md` (which should be run in a nix-shell).

The generated files are checked in, not a build product, to ease incorporation from the DFINITY portal.

The manual adoc rewrite and automatic translation:

- adjusts the adoc to only use features supported by conversion (GH reference and labels syntax, simple tables)
- runs mo-doc to produce markdown documentation including additional file index.md
- rewrites links
- rewrite adoc admonitions to mdx admonitions used by the portal
- supports file inclusion of entire files or specific line ranges (but not tags) use remark-code-import plugin by rewriting the adoc includes (asciidoctor otherwise inlines the include code) so that included files can be checked separately by mo-doc
- preserves adoc block comments (but not line comments) for TODO etc
- rewrites adoc interpreter code attributes to MDX ones
- content fixes spotted during the transition.

The best way to preview the documentation is to open a PR on the portal, and point the motoko git submodule to the branch of your PR and wait for CI to produce a preview.

The next step is to remove the adoc sources and rewrite/remove any related nix derivations, leaving only the markdown as the source of truth, but that can be done in a separate PR.

doc/modules/language-guide/pages/mutable-state.adoc, after:

= Mutable state
:proglang: Motoko
:company-id: DFINITY

Each actor in {proglang} may use, but may _never directly share_,
internal mutable state.

Later, we discuss link:sharing{outfilesuffix}[sharing among actors], where
actors send and receive _immutable_ data, and also handles to each
others external entry points, which serve as _shareable functions_.
Unlike those cases of shareable data, a key {proglang} design
invariant is that _**mutable data** is kept internal (private) to the
actor that allocates it, and **is never shared remotely**_.

In this chapter, we continue using minimal
examples to show how to introduce (private) actor state, and use
mutation operations to change it over time.

In link:local-objects-classes{outfilesuffix}[local objects and classes], we introduce the
syntax for local objects, and a minimal `counter` actor with a single
mutable variable.  In the link:actors-async{outfilesuffix}[following chapter], we
show an actor with the same behavior, exposing the counter variable
indirectly behind an associated service interface for using it
remotely.

== Immutable versus mutable variables

The `var` syntax declares mutable variables in a declaration
block:

[source#init, motoko]
....
let text  : Text = "abc";
let num  : Nat = 30;

var pair : (Text, Nat) = (text, num);
var text2 : Text = text;
....

The declaration list above declares four variables.
The first two variables (`text` and `num`) are lexically-scoped, _immutable variables_.
The final two variables (`pair` and `text2`) are lexically-scoped, *_mutable_* variables.

== Assignment to mutable memory

Mutable variables permit assignment, and immutable variables do not.

If we try to assign new values to either `text` or `num` above, we
will get static type errors; these variables are immutable.

However, we may freely update the value of mutable variables `pair`
and `text2` using the syntax for assignment, written as `:=`, as follows:

[source.include_init, motoko]
....
text2 := text2 # "xyz";
pair := (text2, pair.1);
pair
....

Above, we update each variable based on applying a simple "`update
rule`" to their current values (for example, we _update_ `text2` by
appending string constant `"xyz"` to its suffix).  Likewise, an actor
processes some calls by performing _updates_ on its internal (private)
mutable variables, using the same assignment syntax as above.

=== Special assignment operations

The assignment operation `:=` is general, and works for all types.

{proglang} also includes special assignment operations that combine
assignment with a binary operation.  The assigned value uses the
binary operation on a given operand and the
current contents of the assigned variable.

For example, numbers permit a combination of assignment and addition:

[source, motoko]
....
var num2 = 2;
num2 += 40;
num2
....

After the second line, the variable `num2` holds `42`, as one would expect.

{proglang} includes other combinations as well.  For example, we can rewrite the line above that updates `text2` more concisely as:

[source.include_init, motoko]
....
text2 #= "xyz";
text2
....

As with `+=`, this combined form avoids repeating the assigned
variable's name on the right hand side of the (special) assignment
operator `#=`.

The full table link:language-manual{outfilesuffix}#assignment-operators[assignment operators]
lists numerical, logical, and textual operations over appropriate
types (number, boolean and text values, respectively).

== Reading from mutable memory

When we updated each variable, we also first _read_ from the mutable
contents, with no special syntax.

This illustrates a subtle point: Each use of a mutable variable _looks
like_ the use of an immutable variable, but does not _act like_ one.
In fact, its meaning is more complex.  As in many languages
(JavaScript, Java, C#, etc.), but not all, the syntax of each use
hides the _memory effect_ that accesses the memory cell identified by
that variable, and gets its current value.  Other languages from
functional traditions (SML, OCaml, Haskell, etc), generally expose
these effects syntactically.

Below, we explore this point in detail.

== Understanding `var`- versus `let`-bound variables

Consider the following two variable declarations, which look similar:

[source, motoko]
....
let x : Nat = 0
....

and:

[source, motoko]
....
var x : Nat = 0
....

The only difference in their syntax is the use of keyword `let` versus
`var` to define the variable `x`, which in each case the program
initializes to `0`.

However, these programs carry different meanings, and in the context of larger programs, the difference in meanings will impact the meaning of each occurrence of `x`.

For the first program, which uses `let`, each such occurrence _means_ `0`.  Replacing each occurrence with `0` will not change the meaning of the program.

For the second program, which uses `var`, each occurrence _means_: "`read and produce the current value of the mutable memory cell named `x`.`"
In this case, each occurrence's value is determined by dynamic state: the contents of the mutable memory cell named `x`.

As one can see from the definitions above, there is a fundamental contrast between the meanings of `let`-bound and `var`-bound variables.

In large programs, both kinds of variables can be useful, and neither kind serves as a good replacement for the other.

However, `let`-bound variables _are_ more fundamental.

To see why, consider encoding a `var`-bound variable using a one-element, mutable array, itself bound using a `let`-bound variable.

For instance, instead of declaring `x` as a mutable variable initially holding `0`, we could instead use `y`, an immutable variable that denotes a mutable array with one entry, holding `0`:

[source, motoko]
....
var x : Nat       = 0 ;
let y : [var Nat] = [var 0] ;
....

We explain mutable arrays in more detail <<mutable-arrays, below>>.

Unfortunately, the read and write syntax required for this encoding
reuses that of mutable arrays, which is not as readable as that of
`var`-bound variables.  As such, the reads and writes of variable `x`
will be easier to read than those of variable `y`.

For this practical reason, and others, `var`-bound variables are a
core aspect of the language design.

== Immutable arrays

Before discussing <<mutable-arrays, mutable arrays>>, we introduce immutable arrays, which share the same projection syntax, but do not permit mutable updates (assignments) after allocation.

=== Allocate an immutable array of constants

[source#array, motoko]
....
let a : [Nat] = [1, 2, 3] ;
....

The array `a` above holds three natural numbers, and has type `[Nat]`.
In general, the type of an immutable array is `[_]`, using square
brackets around the type of the array's elements, which must share a
single common type, in this case `Nat`.

=== Project from (read from) an array index

We can project from (_read from_) an array using the usual bracket
syntax (`[` and `]`) around the index we want to access:

[source.include_array, motoko]
....
let x : Nat = a[2] + a[0] ;
....

Every array access in {proglang} is safe.  Accesses that are out of
bounds will not access memory unsafely, but instead will cause the program to trap, as with an link:basic-concepts{outfilesuffix}#assertions[assertion] failure.

== The Array module

The {proglang} standard library provides basic operations for immutable and mutable arrays. It can be imported as follows,

[source#import, motoko]
....
import Array "mo:base/Array";
....

In this section, we discuss some of the most frequently used array operations.
For more information about using arrays, see the link:./base/Array{outfilesuffix}[Array] library descriptions.

=== Allocate an immutable array with varying content

Above, we showed a limited way of creating immutable arrays.

In general, each new array allocated by a program will contain
a varying number of varying elements.  Without mutation, we need a way
to specify this family of elements "all at once", in the argument to
allocation.

To accommodate this need, the {proglang} language provides _the
higher-order_ array-allocation function `Array.tabulate`, which
allocates a new array by consulting a user-provided "generation
function" `gen` for each element.

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
func tabulate<T>(size : Nat,  gen : Nat -> T) : [T]
....

Function `gen` specifies the array _as a function value_ of arrow
type `Nat -> T`, where `T` is the final array element type.

The function `gen` actually _functions_ as the array during
its initialization: It receives the index of the array element, and it produces the element (of type `T`) that should reside at that index in the array.
The allocated output array populates itself based on this specification.

For instance, we can first allocate `array1` consisting of some initial constants, and then functionally-update _some_ of the indices by "changing" them (in a pure, functional way), to produce `array2`, a second array that does not destroy the first.

[source.include_import, motoko]
....
let array1 : [Nat] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8] ;

let array2 : [Nat] = Array.tabulate<Nat>(7, func(i:Nat) : Nat {
    if ( i == 2 or i == 5 ) { array1[i] * i } // change 3rd and 6th entries
    else { array1[i] } // no change to other entries
  }) ;
....

Even though we "changed" `array1` into `array2` in a functional sense, notice that both arrays and both variables are immutable.

Next, we consider _mutable_ arrays, which are fundamentally distinct.

== Mutable arrays

Above, we introduced _immutable_ arrays, which share the same projection syntax as mutable arrays, but do not permit mutable updates (assignments) after allocation.  Unlike immutable arrays, each mutable array in {proglang} introduces (private) mutable actor state.

Because {proglang}'s type system enforces that remote actors do not share their mutable state, the {proglang} type system introduces a firm distinction between mutable and immutable arrays that impacts typing, subtyping and the language abstractions for asynchronous communication.

Locally, the mutable arrays can not be used in places that expect immutable ones, since {proglang}'s definition of link:language-manual{outfilesuffix}#subtyping[subtyping] for arrays (correctly) distinguishes those cases for the purposes of type soundness.
Additionally, in terms of
actor communication, immutable arrays are safe to send and share, while mutable arrays can not be shared or otherwise sent in messages.
Unlike immutable arrays, mutable arrays have _non-shareable types_.

=== Allocate a mutable array of constants

To indicate allocation of _mutable_ arrays (in contrast to the forms above, for immutable ones), the mutable array syntax `[var _]` uses the `var` keyword, in both the expression and type forms:

[source, motoko]
....
let a : [var Nat] = [var 1, 2, 3] ;
....

As above, the array `a` above holds three natural numbers, but has type `[var Nat]`.

=== Allocate a mutable array with dynamic size

To allocate mutable arrays of non-constant size, use the `Array_init` primitive, and supply an initial value:

[source.no-repl, motoko]
....
func init<T>(size : Nat,  x : T) : [var T]
....

For example:

[source.include_import, motoko]
....
var size : Nat = 42 ;
let x : [var Nat] = Array.init<Nat>(size, 3);
....

The variable `size` need not be constant here; the array will have `size` number of entries, each holding the initial value `3`.

=== Mutable updates

Mutable arrays, each with type form `[var _]`, permit mutable updates via assignment to an individual element, in this case element index `2` gets updated from holding `3` to instead hold value `42`:

[source, motoko]
....
let a : [var Nat] = [var 1, 2, 3];
a[2] := 42;
a
....

=== Subtyping does not permit _mutable_ to be used as _immutable_

Subtyping in {proglang} does not permit us to use a mutable array of type `[var Nat]` in places that expect an immutable one of type `[Nat]`.

There are two reasons for this.
First, as with all mutable state, mutable arrays require different rules for sound subtyping.
In particular, mutable arrays have a less flexible subtyping definition, necessarily.
Second, {proglang} forbids uses of mutable arrays across link:actors-async{outfilesuffix}[asynchronous communication], where mutable state is never shared.
