**[ DO NOT EDIT -- GENERATED by a Makefile, on Thu Mar 14 13:16:22 MDT 2019 ]**

-----------------------------------------------------------------



Association Lists
==================

Association Lists, a la functional programming, in ActorScript.

Implements the same interface as `Trie`, but as a linked-list of key-value pairs.

```
...
```

   `find`
   --------
   find the value associated with a given key, or null if absent.

```
...
```

   `replace`
   ---------
   replace the value associated with a given key, or add it, if missing.
   returns old value, or null, if no prior value existed.

```
...
```

   `diff`
   ---------
   The key-value pairs of the final list consists of those pairs of
   the left list whose keys are not present in the right list; the
   values of the right list are irrelevant.

```
...
```


   `disj`
   --------
   This operation generalizes the notion of "set union" to finite maps.
   Produces a "disjunctive image" of the two lists, where the values of
   matching keys are combined with the given binary operator.

   For unmatched key-value pairs, the operator is still applied to
   create the value in the image.  To accomodate these various
   situations, the operator accepts optional values, but is never
   applied to (null, null).

```
...
```


   `conj`
   ---------
   This operation generalizes the notion of "set intersection" to
   finite maps.  Produces a "conjuctive image" of the two lists, where
   the values of matching keys are combined with the given binary
   operator, and unmatched key-value pairs are not present in the output.

```
...
```

   `fold`
   ---------

