**[ DO NOT EDIT -- GENERATED by a Makefile, on Thu Mar 14 13:13:27 MDT 2019 ]**

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Produce Exchange Example
========================

The produce exchange (PE) is a canonical example Dapp, illustrating
the DFINITY Dapp design process on a realistic marketplace-like
application.

The design began as a [two page Google drive
document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AxpcuFH-x_0ZSa32DfM_BCYnGxCS37ETPNWE4BXDNdo/edit)
giving the Dapp's functional specifications.

The design now evolves in two places:

 1. The SDK and ActorScript teams' documentation:  
    i. [The design document, under the SDK
     space](https://dfinity.atlassian.net/wiki/x/MwD2Bg).  
    ii. [The requirements document for the MVP
      Design](https://dfinity.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DE/pages/116654198/Produce+Exchange+MVP+Product+Requirements).  
    iii. [Documentation under the ActorScript space](https://dfinity.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AST/pages/104401122/Example+Dapp+Produce+Exchange).  

 2. [**This example folder** in the ActorScript Github repo](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/tree/stdlib-examples/stdlib/examples/produce-exchange),
    which is implementing the Produce Exchange as a way to push the development of
 the ActorScript language, its standard library, and elsewhere, the
 ambient DFINITY system that runs ActorScript canisters.

Scripted uses of the Produce Exchange
----------------------------------------

- [x] [Simple setup-and-query script](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/blob/stdlib-examples/stdlib/examples/produce-exchange/test/simpleSetupAndQuery.as)
- [ ] Randomly-generated scripts


Server components
-----------------------

We decompose the Produce Exchange example Dapp into an
_ActorScript-based_ implementation of a "**Server**" with the
following definitional pieces:

The first two server components give formal definitions for the
[Produce Exchange Standards Specification
(PESS)](#Produce-Exchange-Standards-Specification-PESS); See below for
more
about PESS.  

The final two server components (server model types and server model
implementation), give a formal specification of behavior that defines
the **behavior for the PESS**, but the _implementation details of
these two components themselves are not in PESS, and are subject to
change independently of PESS._

 1. **Basic types**: See
    [`serverTypes.as`](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/blob/stdlib-examples/stdlib/examples/produce-exchange/serverTypes.as).  
    Basic types used in messages, and published/stored internally in the server actor's state.

 2. **Server messages**: See
    [`serverActor.as`](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/blob/stdlib-examples/stdlib/examples/produce-exchange/serverActor.as).  
    Defined by the server actor's public signature, which specifies the messages and message formats for each participant.

 3. **Server model types**: See
    [`serverModelTypes.as`](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/blob/stdlib-examples/stdlib/examples/produce-exchange/serverModelTypes.as).  
    Defines structures that internally implement the server actor, and which are _not_ present in its public-facing interface.

    These models use [collections from the standard library](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/tree/master/stdlib) [(Jira Story)](https://dfinity.atlassian.net/browse/AST-31).

 4. **Server implementation**: See
    [`serverModel.as`](https://github.com/dfinity-lab/actorscript/blob/stdlib-examples/stdlib/examples/produce-exchange/serverModel.as).  
    Defines the _behavioral (input-output-based) semantics_ of each message from item 2, by
    implementing the server's interface in terms of the _server model types_ defined in item 3.

Test suite components
----------------------------------

We decompose the **test suite** for the Produce Exchange into the following milestones and associated test components:

 5. **Server actor example uses**:
    Use the system on small examples, whose output can be shown in a demo, presentation, slide deck, etc.

    To do

 6. **Automated regression tests**:
    Generate (online or offline) random example uses, and record the current output; check future revisions against this output.

    To do

 7. **Performance models**:
    Generate (online or offline) random example uses, and record time and space usage of the Wasm VM across different work loads; plot this data, and generate human-readable reports about it.

    To do

See below for [more thoughts about performance testing]().

Currently, we use purely-functional data structures, since their
design permits `O(1)`-time/space for sharing, and their immutability
makes them suitable for mathematical reasoning.  These properties are
practically important as a specification, but also suggest even more
optimized representations, with the same mathematical properties.  See
below, for more details on ["chunky representations".](#chunky-representations].



To do list
-----------

This example is a work in progress.  It will be finished (and merged
to `master`) when the following are in a stable state, and working
locally, as locally-running ActorScript.

**Requirements list**:
  1. **the exchange’s interface definition**, as an ActorScript actor.

  2.  **the behavior of the exchange**, as that actor’s prototype
      implementation.

  3. **the internal data model representation**, based on the
     ActorScript language and standard library, used internally to the
     actor, to implement the specification behavior.

  4. **test suite** for all of the above, using local execution and
     ActorScript-based test cases.

**Canister component**: The requirements listed above also correspond with
those of the *Canister component* in Milestone 2.0 of the [MVP
Requirements Spec, 1.ii
above](https://dfinity.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DE/pages/116654198/Produce+Exchange+MVP+Product+Requirements).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Open Questions:
================

As part of the to do list above, we have the following questions:

 1. Massive result messages: How do we represent and send these?

    - lazy lists? (seems "easy" from AS programmer perspective, but
      requires non-first-order data in the IDL)

    - list iterators? (almost as good as lazy lists, but requires
      references in the IDL, and complicates the GC story).

    - arrays? (expensive to build and send; can become way *too big*).

    **2019.03.12 -- TODO-Cursors:** Introduce the idea of "cursors", with
    allocation, de-allocation and movement messages, as per discussion in
    the 2019.03.12 ActorScript Team meeting.

 2. For now, wan we assume that the canister is maintained by the
    central authority?

 3. "Conditional updates" -- important to Mack

 4. How complex can the queries become?  Can we do truck-sharing-based
    queries, where we query as a retailer that expects to share trucks
    across several producer orders (e.g., in the same origin region).
    Alternatively, can we order multiple items from a single producer to
    ship on a single truck route?  Presumably, we can?

 5. Define a query language?
    --- Not until ActorScript implements variant types.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------


Produce Exchange Standards Specification (PESS)
==================================================

The Produce Exchange is a DFINITY canister whose implementation
defines a set of _standards_ whose **formal specification** we refer to collectively as
the _"Produce Exchange Standards Specification"_, or _"PESS"_ for short.


The PESS, defined formally, in ActorScript:
-------------------------------------------

We break this definition into several files, listed above in the
[server components list](#server-components), and mentioned again
below.

These files make the PESS definition into a **formal definition**, to
the same degree that ActorScript has a formal semantics of its own, in
terms of DFINITY's semantics, etc.

**Files for the PESS definition**: The file `serverTypes.as` defines
ActorScript data types that are included in the PESS, and will appear
in the messages to and from the produce exchange server.  The server
actor class itself (see `serverActor.as`) gives the interface for the
PE service, is also part of the formal PESS.  The _behavior_ of this
actor's implementation defines the _semantic_ aspects of the PESS
standard.

**Non-PESS files**: The `serverModel.as` file defines types used to
implement the specification behavior given in `serverActor.as`; this
file is not part of the PESS.

**Server message formats**: The server actor defines an interface boundary that only uses types
from `serverTypes.as`, and none from `serverModel.as`.  The implementation details
of this latter file and its use in the actor behavior are both subject to
change over time, independently of the standards' own evolution.  We
include the full implementation details here because the associated
behavior is needed to define the semantics of the PESS, as explained
above.

**Design principle for PESS interface**: Whenever possible, we will
push the implementation of "business logic" into `serverModel.as`,
with the aspiration of `serverActor.as` being a minimal wrapper over
definitions in `serverModel.as`, and little to no logic of its own.


PESS evolution via canister upgrade
-----------------------------------

The PESS evolves according to the "central authority" (cf PE spec
document), who we identify as the github repo and open source
developer community that surrounds this implementation.

Updating the types in the PESS requires changing the file `serverTypes.as`
mentioned above, and performing a canister upgrade on the running
system.  Similarly, to evolve the behavioral definition of PESS, the
implementation of this actor will change (in `serverActor.as` and
`serverModel.as`), and will also require a canister upgrade.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Performance considerations
====================================================================

After having a functioning specification, we will employ the thoughts
below toward getting better performance.

The main thrust of the work on this canister is currently focused on
creating an executable prototype.

At some point (near the end of our test suite components), we will
want to consider botj the **asymptotic** and **constant-factor** performance 
properties of our implementation.

In particular, this performance is phrased in terms of **workloads**,
executing update & query behavior over the PESS server definition
implementation.

We shall vary workloads in kind and size, and measure space and time
usage of the Wasm VM running this implementation, in terms of the
standard library of collections implemented here.

Alternative representations in `stdlib`
-------------------------------------------

Notably, the one and only collection type used in this implementation
is the `Map` type.

Changing this type out amounts to extending the standard library with
additional implementations of the finite map interface that it
provides.

Crucially, we the hash trie implementation of `Map` uses a _functional
representation_, with expected times as follows (expected time
analysis, because of hashing):

```
   Trie.copy                      : O(1)
   Trie.find                      : O(log n)
   Trie.replace, .insert, .remove : O(log n)
   Trie.merge, .split             : O(log n)
?? Trie.union                     : O(log n)
?? Trie.intersect                 : O(log n)
```

We might consider validating the followin claim:

>    **Claim:** The asymptotic properties of the hash trie are ideal
>    for a practical (infinitely-scalable) implementation of PESS.

Before considering other representations, we should evaluate this
claim on randomly-generated use-cases of varying size, to simulate
realistic (but synthetic) workloads, and measure time and space usage
by the Wasm VM.

Chunky Representations:
------------------------

Once we can generate performance plots, we should consider comparing
different representations for `Map` that still use a hash trie.

A simple variation uses **"chunks"** at the leaves of the hash trie,
to represent sub-maps of the threshhold size where the pointers
involved in the per-hash-bit branching no longer pays off.

See also:

 - [Hashtable representation](#hashtable-representation).
 - [Association array representation](#association-array-representation).


Association array representation:
---------------------------------------

Association arrays are optimized for cache locality.  They each store
a key-value mapping as two arrays: one of keys, and one of values.  To
find a key-value pair, do a linear-scan in the array of keys to
find the corresponding position of the value, in that array. Regrow
the two arrays by doubling, or some other scheme.

```
   Aa.copy                      : O(n)
   Aa.find                      : O(n)
   Aa.replace, .insert, .remove : O(n)
   Aa.merge, .split             : O(n)
?? Aa.union                     : O(n)
?? Aa.intersect                 : O(n)
```

Hashtable representation:
---------------------------------------

A traditional hash table uses an array as a table, indexed by hashes.
It handles hash collisions somehow, perhaps by doing a simple linear
scan.  It regrows the table by doubling, or some other scheme.  It may
or may not shrink the table.

```
   Htbl.copy                      : O(n)
   Htbl.find                      : O(1)
   Htbl.replace, .insert, .remove : O(1)
   Htbl.merge, .split             : O(n)
?? Htbl.union                     : O(n)
?? Htbl.intersect                 : O(n)
```
