**[ DO NOT EDIT -- GENERATED by a Makefile, on Thu Mar 14 13:13:27 MDT 2019 ]**

-----------------------------------------------------------------



Server Model Types
==================

This file defines structures that implement the server actor's
internal model of the exchange.  They are used in `serverModel.as`;
they are _not_ present in the public-facing interface of the server,
only its internal model.

Finite Maps
--------------

Finite maps, or just "maps", will serve as the cornerstone of our
representations below.  The ActorScript standard library implements
functional association lists (modules `List` and `AssocList`) and
functional hash tries (module `Trie`), whose representation uses those
lists, for its "buckets".

These map representations could change and expand in the future, so we
introduce the name `Map` here to abstract over the representation
choice between (for now) using association lists and tries.

Aside: Eventually, we'll likely have a more optimized trie that uses
small arrays in its leaf nodes.  The current representation is simple,
uses lots of pointers, and is likely not the optimal candidate for
efficient Wasm.  However, its asymptotic behavior is good, and it thus
provides a good approximation of the eventual design that we want.

```
...
```


Nested structures
-----------------

Below, we define top-level structures for representing each Producer,
Retailer and Transporter's officially published state within the PESS.

Formally, these types define the types of forests (a set of trees with many
roots) that constitute our internal data model.

For each kind of structure below, we assume a type of unique Id
(defined in `types.as`, in the formal PESS).  We associate information, such as
textual names and descriptions, where appropriate.  We include other
fields from the PESS, such as "units", "grades", "dates" and time
intervals (start/end dates), each where appropriate.

To understand how this forest is rooted, see the private variables
defined by the class `Model` (in `serverModel.as`):

```
  private var trucktypes : TruckTypesTable = null;
  private var produce    : ProduceTable = null;
  private var regions    : RegionTable = null;

  private var producers    : ProducerTable = null;
  private var transporters : TransporterTable = null;
  private var retailers    : RetailerTable = null;
```

The first three tables are set up by the central authority when the Dapp
launches, and change seldomly.

The next three tables contain the interesting state of the system.
They give the three sets of roots into the structures defined below.

Query implementation
---------------------

The retailers perform queries by joining information across the
producers and transporters tables, and their inventory and route
information, respectively.

Orders (Reservations) implementation
-------------------------------------

We refer to orders placed by retailrs here as "reservations", since
the latter word is less ambiguous.

To simplify query implementation over reservations, and to improve
this query response time, we store reservations in two places, with
internal sharing:

 - The currently-reserved routes and inventory are stored with their
   transporters and producers, respectively.

 - The currently-reserved routes and inventory of each retailer are
   additionally stored with this retailer.

