# Introduction

Motoko is a modern, general-purpose programming language you can use specifically to author Internet Computer canister smart contracts. Although aimed primarily at ICP canister development, its design is general enough to support future compilation to other targets.

Motoko is designed to be approachable for programmers who have some basic familiarity with object-oriented and/or functional programming idioms in either JavaScript, or another modern programming language, such as Rust, Swift, TypeScript, C#, or Java.

## Motivation and goals

Motoko strives to be a simple and useful language for ICP smart contracts that uses a familiar syntax that incorporates the actor model. Motoko offers seamless integration for ICP features and makes the most out of WebAssembly's present and future functionalities.

Motoko is not, and is not intended to be, the only language for implementing canister smart contracts. Canister development kits exist for Rust, TypeScript, Python, and soon Solidity. ICP's goal is to enable any language to be able to produce canister smart contracts by compiling the canister source code into WebAssembly.

However, its tailored design means Motoko should be the easiest and safest language for coding on ICP.

## Key design points

Motoko provides many other developer productivity features, including subtyping, arbitrary precision arithmetic and garbage collection. It has derived inspiration for its design from languages such as Java, JavaScript, C#, Swift, Pony, ML, and Haskell.

Key design points of Motoko include:

-   Object-oriented, functional & imperative.

-   Objects as records of functions.

-   `async`/`await` for sequential programming of asynchronous messaging.

-   Structural typing with simple generics and subtyping.

-   Safe arithmetic (both unbounded and checked).

-   Non-nullable types by default.

-   Garbage collected (no manual memory management).

-   JavaScript-like syntax but statically typed & sane.

Semantics of Motoko include:

-   Call-by-value (like Java, C, JS, ML; unlike Haskell).

-   Declarations are locally mutually recursive.

-   Parametric, bounded polymorphism.

-   Subtyping as zero-cost subsumption, not coercion.

-   No dynamic casts.

-   No inheritance.

### Native canister smart contract support

Motoko has native support for canister smart contracts, which are expressed as a Motoko actor. An actor is an autonomous object that fully encapsulates its state and communicates with other actors only through asynchronous messages.

### Code sequentially in direct style

On ICP, canisters can communicate with other canisters by sending asynchronous messages.

Asynchronous programming is hard, so Motoko enables you to author asynchronous code in much simpler, sequential style. Asynchronous messages are function calls that return a future, and the `await` construct allows you to suspend execution until a future has completed.
### Modern type system

Motoko has been designed to be intuitive to those familiar with JavaScript and other popular languages, but offers modern features such as sound structural types, generics, variant types, and statically checked pattern matching.

### Autogenerated IDL files

A Motoko actor always presents a typed interface to its clients as a suite of named functions with argument and future result types.

The Motoko compiler and IC SDK can emit this interface in a language neutral format called Candid, so other canisters, browser resident code and smart phone apps that support Candid can use the actor’s services. The Motoko compiler can consume and produce Candid files, allowing Motoko to seamlessly interact with canisters implemented in other programming languages, provided they also support Candid.

### Orthogonal persistence

ICP persists the memory and other state information of a canister as it is executed. Thus the state of a Motoko actor, including its in-memory data structures, survive indefinitely. Actor state does not need to be explicitly restored and saved to external storage.

### Upgrades

Motoko provides numerous features to help you leverage orthogonal persistence, including language features that allow you to retain a canister’s data as you upgrade the code of the canister.

For example, Motoko lets you declare certain variables as `stable`. The values of `stable` variables are automatically preserved across canister upgrades.

Once upgraded, the new interface is compatible with the previous one, meaning existing clients referencing the canister will continue to work, but new clients will be able to exploit its upgraded functionality.

For scenarios that can’t be solved using stable variables alone, Motoko provides user-definable upgrade hooks that run immediately before and after upgrade, and allow you to migrate arbitrary state to stable variables.

## Implementations

Motoko is implemented in OCaml and leverages the `wasm` library. It uses a simple reference interpreter, but has a more complex compilation into WebAssembly. Compilation uses multipass with typed IR in each pass, and uniform representation, unboxed arithmetic. Motoko offers three garbage collectors (copying, compacting, or generational), and garbage collection is invoked after messages. Motoko uses polymorphism by erasure.