rts/README.md, before:

The Motoko RTS (C and Rust parts)
=================================

This directory contains the parts of the Motoko runtime implemented in Rust.

tl;dr
-----

If you just want to get `mo-rts.wasm` in this directory, run

    nix-shell --run 'make -C rts'

from the top-level directory of the Motoko repository.

Compilation
-----------

Running `make` should produce `mo-rts.wasm`.

If run within `nix-shell`, the environment variables `WASM_CLANG` and `WASM_LD`
should point to suitable binaries (we track a specific unreleased version of
`llvm`). If not present, the `Makefile` will try to use `clang-10` and
`wasm-ld-10`.

The runtime compiles and links in [libtommath]. It needs the source, so
`nix-build` and `nix-shell` will set the environment variable `TOMMATHSRC` to
point to the source in `/nix/store`.

If not present, the `Makefile` will look in `../../libtommath`, i.e. parallel
to the `motoko` repository; this is useful if you need to hack on libtommath.

[libtommath]: https://github.com/libtom/libtommath

Exporting and importing functions
---------------------------------

Import and export as if you are importing from or exporting to a C library. Examples:

```rust
// Expects bigint_trap to be provided at link time. The function should follow
// C calling conventions
extern "C" {
    fn bigint_trap() -> !;
}

// Provides bigint_add function. The function follows C calling conventions
#[no_mangle]
extern "C" fn bigint_add(...) { ... }
```

libtommath and memory management
--------------------------------

We have to make libtommath’s memory management (which expects functions
`alloc`, `calloc` and `realloc`) work with the Motoko runtime.
See `motoko-rts/src/bigint.rs` for the technical details.

Rust build
----------

The Rust parts are built from `motoko-rts`, using `xargo` and `cargo`.

To build this in nix, we need pre-fetch some dependencies (currently
`compiler_builtins` and `libc`). This works in `nix-build` by:

 * Adding`compiler_builtins` as a dependency in `Cargo.toml` (even though not
   needed), so that it shows up with a hash in `Cargo.lock`

 * Building a directory with vendored sources in `default.nix` (see `rustDeps`)

 * Configuring `cargo` to use that vendored directory (see `preBuild`)

If you change dependencies (e.g. bump versions, add more crates),

 1. Add them to `Cargo.toml`
 2. Make sure that `Cargo.lock` is up to date
 3. In `default.nix`, invalidate the `sha256` of `rustDeps` (e.g. change one
    character)
 4. Run `nix-build -A rts`. You should get an error message about the actual
    checksum.
 5. Set that as `sha256` of `rustDeps` in `default.nix`

Warning: nix will happily use a stale version of the dependencies if you do not
do step 3.

Running RTS tests
-----------------

- Build tests using rustc WASI target: `cargo build --target=wasm32-wasi`
- Run with wasmtime: `wasmtime target/wasm32-wasi/debug/motoko-rts-tests.wasm`

Debugging the RTS
-----------------

It is possible to build the RTS and test suite for i686 and debug using native
debug tools like gdb and rr. You first need to build tommath-related files.
This is easiest to do in `nix-shell`:

- (in `rts/`) `make _build/libtommath_i686.a` (this step requires headers and
  libraries for the target)
- (in `rts/`) `make _build/tommath_bindings.rs` (this step requires `bindgen`)

After these you can build the test suite for `i686-unknown-linux-gnu` target
outside of `nix-shell`. If you don't have the target installed already, install with

- `rustup +nightly target install i686-unknown-linux-gnu`

Now build i686 executable:

- (in `rts/motoko-rts-tests`) `cargo +nightly build --target=i686-unknown-linux-gnu`

Now you should see an i686 executable
`rts/motoko-rts-tests/target/i686-unknown-linux-gnu/debug/motoko-rts-tests`
that you can debug with e.g. `gdb`.

Ideally all of these steps would be done in `nix-shell` or outside, but the
last command does not work in `nix-shell` because of missing i686 libraries and
I couldn't figure out how to install those in nix.

Commit message:

Update Rust (#2761)
This PR bumps rustc version and removes xargo. std dependencies are now built
with cargo's new `-Zbuild-std` parameter.

To work around rust-lang/wg-cargo-std-aware#23, we implement a tool
"vendor-rust-std-deps" that reads `Cargo.lock` of a Rust toolchain std and
manually vendors all the dependencies.

These dependencies are then merged with the Rust RTS dependencies before the
building the RTS in nix.

RTS README updated with instructions to bump rustc.

New rustc will enable more const functions, new API functions, stabilizations,
and features for other RTS PRs.

rts/README.md, after:

The Motoko RTS (C and Rust parts)
=================================

This directory contains the parts of the Motoko runtime implemented in Rust.

tl;dr
-----

If you just want to get `mo-rts.wasm` in this directory, run

    nix-shell --run 'make -C rts'

from the top-level directory of the Motoko repository.

Compilation
-----------

Running `make` should produce `mo-rts.wasm`.

If run within `nix-shell`, the environment variables `WASM_CLANG` and `WASM_LD`
should point to suitable binaries (we track a specific unreleased version of
`llvm`). If not present, the `Makefile` will try to use `clang-10` and
`wasm-ld-10`.

The runtime compiles and links in [libtommath]. It needs the source, so
`nix-build` and `nix-shell` will set the environment variable `TOMMATHSRC` to
point to the source in `/nix/store`.

If not present, the `Makefile` will look in `../../libtommath`, i.e. parallel
to the `motoko` repository; this is useful if you need to hack on libtommath.

[libtommath]: https://github.com/libtom/libtommath

Exporting and importing functions
---------------------------------

Import and export as if you are importing from or exporting to a C library. Examples:

```rust
// Expects bigint_trap to be provided at link time. The function should follow
// C calling conventions
extern "C" {
    fn bigint_trap() -> !;
}

// Provides bigint_add function. The function follows C calling conventions
#[no_mangle]
extern "C" fn bigint_add(...) { ... }
```

libtommath and memory management
--------------------------------

We have to make libtommath’s memory management (which expects functions
`alloc`, `calloc` and `realloc`) work with the Motoko runtime.
See `motoko-rts/src/bigint.rs` for the technical details.

Rust build
----------

To build Motoko RTS in nix we need pre-fetch Rust dependencies. This works in
`nix-build` by:

 * Building a directory with vendored sources in `default.nix`

 * Configuring `cargo` to use that vendored directory (see `preBuild`)

If you change dependencies (e.g. bump versions, add more crates),

 1. Make sure that `motoko-rts-tests/Cargo.lock` is up to date. This can be
    done by running `cargo build --target=wasm32-wasi` in `motoko-rts-tests/`
    directory.
 2. In `default.nix`, invalidate the `sha256` of `rtsDeps` (e.g. change one
    character)
 3. Run `nix-build -A rts`. You should get an error message about the actual
    checksum.
 4. Set that as `sha256` of `rtsDeps` in `default.nix`

Warning: nix will happily use a stale version of the dependencies if you do not
do step 3.

**Updating rustc**:

1. Update Rust version in `nix/default.nix`, in the line with
   `moz_overlay.rustChannelOf { ... }`.
2. Invalidate `rustStdDepsHash` in `default.nix`.
3. Run `nix-build -A rts`. You should get an error message about the expected
   value of `rustStdDepsHash`.
4. Update `rustStdDepsHash` with the expected value in the error message.

Running RTS tests
-----------------

- Build tests using rustc WASI target: `cargo build --target=wasm32-wasi`
- Run with wasmtime: `wasmtime target/wasm32-wasi/debug/motoko-rts-tests.wasm`

Debugging the RTS
-----------------

It is possible to build the RTS and test suite for i686 and debug using native
debug tools like gdb and rr. You first need to build tommath-related files.
This is easiest to do in `nix-shell`:

- (in `rts/`) `make _build/libtommath_i686.a` (this step requires headers and
  libraries for the target)
- (in `rts/`) `make _build/tommath_bindings.rs` (this step requires `bindgen`)

After these you can build the test suite for `i686-unknown-linux-gnu` target
outside of `nix-shell`. If you don't have the target installed already, install with

- `rustup +nightly target install i686-unknown-linux-gnu`

Now build i686 executable:

- (in `rts/motoko-rts-tests`) `cargo +nightly build --target=i686-unknown-linux-gnu`

Now you should see an i686 executable
`rts/motoko-rts-tests/target/i686-unknown-linux-gnu/debug/motoko-rts-tests`
that you can debug with e.g. `gdb`.

Ideally all of these steps would be done in `nix-shell` or outside, but the
last command does not work in `nix-shell` because of missing i686 libraries and
I couldn't figure out how to install those in nix.
